# FASTTypeScript  

FASTTypeScript is a recently created project that integrates with Moose and leverages the Tree-Sitter parser to analyze TypeScript source code in Pharo.  

## Features  
FASTTypeScript relies on:  
- **[FAST][fast]**, to ensure compatibility with Moose.  
- **[Pharo-Tree-Sitter][pharo-tree-sitter]**, implemented in Pharo via the FFI protocol to efficiently parse TypeScript source code. It is also used to do incremental parsing.

FASTTypeScript metamodel is defined in a way where nodes align with those generated by Tree-Sitter.

## Installation  

To load FASTTypeScript in Pharo, execute the following in a Moose image:  

```smalltalk  
Metacello new  
  baseline: 'FASTTypescript';  
  repository: 'github://moosetechnology/FASTTypescript:main';  
  load.
```  

## Usage

In order to use it, please make sure that you have installed on your machine the corresponding libraries for tree sitter, in order to make sure the parsing succeeds.
Normally this has been automated for different operating systems.
But for more details you can have a look at this [blog-post][tree-sitter-blog].

To use it in Pharo, you can check below example:
```smalltalk  
res := FASTTypescriptGenerator new getASTFromString:  'class SimpleClass {
	integerProperty = 1;
  	doubleProperty = 1.2;  	
   booleanProperty= true;
  	stringProperty = "hello";
}'. 
```  

## NB

The project is still at the very begining. But at least now it can parse and generate a basic model of FASTTypescript.
Still need to:
- Reorder classes
- Add new properties
- Check traits
- Add tests

Your contribution is more than welcome.
Happy coding with Typescript :)

[fast]: https://github.com/moosetechnology/FAST 
[pharo-tree-sitter]: https://github.com/Evref-BL/Pharo-Tree-Sitter
[tree-sitter-blog]: https://github.com/moosetechnology/moosetechnology.github.io/blob/c2d6c85f8c2145380db7fc0ad9994640e97b635e/_drafts/2025-03-25-tree-sitter.md
